Chapter II Where Bodhisattvas Stand

He does not stand in form, perception or in feeling,In will or consciousness, in any skandha whatsoever.In Dharma’s true 
nature alone he is standing.Then that is his practice of wisdom, the highest perfection.

Change and no change, suffering and ease, the self and not-self,The lovely and repulsive - just one Suchness in this Empt
iness they are.And so he takes not his stand on the fruit which he won, which is threefold -That of an Arhat, a Single B
uddha, a Buddha fully enlightened.

The Leader himself was not stationed in the realm which is free from conditions,Nor in the things which are under conditi
ons, but freely he wandered without a home:Just so, without a support or a basis a Bodhisattva is standing.A position de
void of a basis has that position been called by the Jina.

Wherein Bodhisattvas TrainThose who wish to become the Sugata’s Disciples,Or Pratyekabuddhas, or likewise, Kings of the D
harma -Without resort to this Patience they cannot reach their respective goals.They move across, but their eyes are not
on the other shore.

Those who teach dharma, and those who listen when it is being taught;Those who have won the fruit of an Arhat, a Single B
uddha, or a world-saviour;And the Nirvana obtained by the wise and the learned -Mere illusions, mere dreams - so has the
Tathagata taught us.

Four kinds of persons are not alarmed by this teaching:Sons of the Jina skilled in the truths; saints unable to turn back
,Arhats free from defilements and taints, and rid of their doubts;Those whom good teachers mature are reckoned the fourt
h kind.

Coursing thus, the wise and learned Bodhisattva,Trains not for Arhatship, nor on the level of Pratyekabuddhas.In the Budd
ha-dharma alone he trains for the sake of all-knowledge.No training is his training, and no one is trained in this train
ing.

Increase or decrease of forms is not the aim of this training,Nor does he set out to acquire various dharmas.All-knowledg
e alone he can hope to acquire by this training.To that he goes forth when he trains in this training, and delights in i
ts virtues.

The Facts of ExistenceForms are not wisdom, nor is wisdom found in form,In consciousness, perceptions, feeling, or in wil
l.They are not wisdom, and no wisdom is in them.Like space it is, without a break or crack.

Of all objective supports the essential original nature is boundless;Of beings likewise the essential original nature is 
boundless.As the essential original nature of space has no limits,Just so the wisdom of the World-knowers is boundless.

‘Perceptions’ - mere words, so the Leaders have told us;Perceptions forsaken and gone, and the door is open to the Beyond
.Those who succeed in ridding themselves of perceptions,They, having reached the Beyond, fulfil the Teacher’s commandmen
ts.

If for aeons countless as the sands of the GangesThe Leader would himself continue to pronounce the word ‘being’:Still, p
ure from the very start, no being could ever result from his speaking.That is the practice of wisdom, the highest perfec
tion.

ConclusionAnd so the Jina concludes his preaching, and finally tells us:“When all I said and did at last agreed with perf
ect wisdom,Then this prediction I received from Him who went before me:‘Fully enlightened, at a future time thou shalt a
Buddha be!'"

